# Index Storage

## Data Entry Formats:

__Alt 1__ - Full record is stored
__Alt 2__ - `<index search key, record id>`
__Alt 3__ - `<index search key, list of record ids>`

## Cost of Search

Generally speaking about IO costs (Number of read and writes). P = # of pages

### Heap File

Searching for a unique property = 1/P
Searching for a non unique property = P

### Sorted File

Searching for a unique property = log2 P
Searching for a non unique property = log2 P + # of matching pages

### Hash Based Storage

Searching for a unique property = 1.2

Hash tables are very good for equality searches, but they run into problems
when dealing with ranges and non distinct records. When situations like this
occur, if the values are distinct, we could just iterate through each of the
possible values. For non-discrete numbers, this would be impossible. Either
way, its often better to just access the data directly. (Note: we assume
constant time is 1.2 in this class)

### Tree Indexes

What is a tree index? An index with several levels. Leaf levels contain the
actual data, above them are search based levels that help direct your search
to the appropriate leaf node(s). Additionally, the leaf nodes are chained
together which makes traversing ranges trivial because we don't need to go
back up the tree. (Note: an index tree is not necessarily a binary tree. The
tree traditionally has a fanout F.)

Search for unique property = logF P + 1
Search for a non unique property = logF P + # of matching pages

Diagam:

                                ________Top______
                               /     |       |    \
                             /       |       |      \
                         Search   Search   Search    Search
                        /   |  \                   /   |   \
                    Leaf->Leaf->Leaf->...->...->Leaf->Leaf->Leaf

B+ Tree Indexs are nice because they reballance themselves. In a non-ballanced
tree the data could be very skewed to one side or another. With a ballanced
tree, we can easily estimate costs because we know more or less how long
things will take.

Typically B+ Tree pages are only around 67% full because we want to be able to
easily insert records without having to reballance the tree.

## Types of indexes

### Primary vs Secondary

Primary indexes are awesome because they're unique!

### Clustered vs Unclustered

Clustered data means that the data is stored together arranged by index. The
advantage of this is that when we're looking up things stored in either
alternative 2 or 3, we can make less reads from the disk because the records
we are interested in are grouped together. 

Alternative 1 indexes are by definition clustered regardless of how they are
stored.

Only one of the indexs for a given set of data can be clustered. In other
words, data can only be ordered by one constraint.


## Example

We have the following indexes on the Employee table

(a) Heap File

(b) Sorted File <age, salary>

(c) Clustered B+ Tree in Alternative 1 <age, salary> - Since the pages are
only 67% full, there will be 1.5P data pages in this index. The height of this
tree would be logF (1.5P).

(d) Unclustered B+ Tree <age, salary> - Since this is stored in either
alternative 2 or 3, the size of this is only 10% of what it would normally be.
Since B+ trees have 67% occupancy, the total data pages would be 0.15P. But,
since the records are stored in alternative 2 or 3, we need to store the real
data somewhere else. So there must be an additional P data pages elsewhere.
The height would be LogF (0.15P)

(e) Unclustered Hash Table <age, salary> - P is in a heap file. 0.125P data
pages in the index buckets since Hash tables have roughly 80% occupancy per
page.

<age, salary> = 10% size of employee table

P: # of pages compacted
R: # of records per page
D: I/O Cost
M: Matching pages
m: Matching records

| Index | Full Scan         | = (Unique)       | = (Non-unique)    | Range            | Insert                | Delete                |
| (a)   | P(D)              | 0.5PD            | PD                | PD               | 2D                    | 0.5PD + D             |
| (b)   | P(D)              | log2(P)D         | log2(P)D + M      | log2(P)D + MD    | log(P)D + D           | log2(P)D + D          |
| (c)   | 1.5P(D)           | logF(1.5P)D      | logF(1.5P)D + MD  | logF(1.5)D + MD  | logF(1.5P)D + D       | logF(1.5P)D + D       |
| (d)   | PD | (0.15P+PR)D  | logF(0.15P)D + D | logF(0.15P)D + mD | logF(0.15)D + MD | logF(0.15P)D + D + 2D | logF(0.15P)D + D + 2D |
| (e)   | PD | (0.125P+PR)D | D + D            | D + mD            | D + mD           | D + LD + 2D           | D + LD + 2d           |
