# Set Operations

The three main set operations: Union, Intersection, Difference. 

## Intersection

Select an tuples that are in Relation one and Relation 2. Intersections are a
special kind of join that matches on every single attribute.

## Union

Union is any tuple that appears in one relation or the other but not both.
This could be accomplished very inefficiently using nested loops, but would
be better with a sort merge that removed duplicates or hash merge.

## Difference

All the tuples that are in the first relation but not in the second.  Block
nested loops aren't as inefficient in this case, but sort and hash merge are
still probably faster.

## Aggregations

Compute a value based on a set of tuples. We can typically scan the whole
table if necessary or perform these in a single query (min/max).

Ex: Count, sum, min, max, and avg.

Things get tricky when we're grouping objects. There are two main ways to
partition the groups (sorting and hashing). So if we were looking for average
GPA grouped by major, we could either sort everything by major and GPA or
insert everything into a hash table based on major and then calculate the GPA.

# System R Optimizer

One of the most common query optimizers used today.  The goal is to estimate
the cost of a given query and make a choice as to the best way to retrieve the
data.

The decision is based on:

  - cost estimation
  - plan space - what is the best ordering of operations

## Query Plans

    SELECT R.b
    FROM R, S
    WHERE R.b = S.b AND R.a = 3

Option 1:

    πR.b
      |
    σR.a=3
      |
      ∞
    /   \
   R     S

Option 2:

        πR.b
          |
          ∞
        /   \
    σR.a=3  πS.b
      |       |
      R       S

## Joining multiple relations:

    SELECT R.b
    FROM R, S, T, U
    WHERE R.b = S.b AND R.a = 3
    AND S.c = T.c AND T.d = U.d

System R will only consider a subset of the orderings of the joins in order to
avoid cross products.  For example, joining R and U before any of the other
relations would be a waste because the only common fields would be the cross
product.

Valid orderings would be: `RSTU`, `UTSR`, `STUR`, `STRU`, `TUSR`, SRTU`,
`TSUR`, and `TSRU`

We went from 20 possible orderings to 8!

## A simple query example

Schema: (^ denotes index)

    Students (^sid, sname, major, gpa)
    Enroll ( ^sid, ^cid, ^semester, grade )

Storage:

    S Tuples: 40 bytes long
              100 / page
              1,000 pages
              100,000 tuples

    E Tuples: 50 bytes long
              80 / page
              500 pages
              40,000 tuples

Query:

    SELECT S.sname
    FROM Enroll E, Student S
    WHERE E.sid = S.sid
    AND (E.cid >= 400 AND E.cid < 500) // 10%
    AND s.pga > 3.5 // 10%

No Index Solution:

          π sname
             |
         σa gpa > 3.5
             |
      σa 400 >= cid < 500
             |
      ∞ S.sid = E.sid
       /         \
    Student     Enroll

For this schema we can't use an index because the selections are based on the
result of a join.  So we can either write it temporarily on disk or do the
check while I'm doing the join.

We can make this faster by applying the GPA and cid filters before the merge
since this will reduce the number of tuples to a fraction of the original
size. This is called "pushing down" the selections.

                π sname
                  |
          ∞ S.sid = E.sid
           /           \
    σa gpa > 3.5  σa 400 >= cid < 500
          |            |
      Student         Enroll


What is the cost?

Sequential scan of Students: 1000 I/Os + 100 pages of output
Sequential scan of Enroll:  500 I/Os + 5 pages of output
Join: 100 I/Os to scan students + ceil(100/3) I/Os for loop * 5 I/O scan of enroll = 270 I/Os

What is the size of the output?

Each joined tuple is about 90 bytes - 10 bytes from duplicate sid = 80 bytes
25 pages of output

