# Overview

Midterm next Wednesday: 2/29/2012

Everything up to and including chapter 3 (except strongly connected
components.) We can bring paper notes.

# Graphs

How can we cross all the bridges in Kaliningrad and return to the point of
origin?

See this: http://aix1.uottawa.ca/~jkhoury/graph.htm

It's not possible because the degree of every node in the graph is odd.

## Adjacency Matricies

We can represent a graph using a matrix where the values represent the number
of edges between two points:

       1 2 3 4
      ________
   1 | 0 2 0 1
   2 | 2 0 2 1
   3 | 0 2 0 1
   4 | 1 1 1 0

This is easily though of as a mutli demensional array

### Adjacency Lists

     [1] -> [2] -> [2] -> [4]
     [2] -> [1] -> [1] -> [3] -> [3] -> [4]
     [3] -> [2] -> [2] -> [4]
     [4] -> [1] -> [2] -> [3]

## Simple Undirected

A graph is undirected if the graph's nodes can be traversed in either
direction.

Properties of a simple undirected graph in terms of the adjacency matrix:

 - Undirected - symetrix with respect to the main diagonal
 - No Multiple Edges - only 1s and 0s
 - No Loops - diagonal is all zeros

### Conventions

    G = (V,E)

    V = Set of verticies
    E = Set of edges

    n = # of verticies
    m = # of edges

    deg(v) = # of edges linking to the vertex

### Adjacency Matrix vs. Adjaceny List

                        | Matrix | List
    Size                | O(n^2) | Θ(n + 2m)
    Graph Empty?        | O(n^2) | Θ(n)
    All Neighbors       | O(n)   | O(deg(node)) / O(n)
    Are nodes connected | O(1)   | O(deg(node))

A set of verticies form a connected component if for any vertex within a set,
I can reach any other vertex in the set and there is no point outside the set
that is reachable from any vertex within the set.

## Depth First Search

Procedure Explore A.K.A Depth First Search

    Input: G = (V,E) vεV
    Output: Visted [ ]

    explore(v):
      set (v,u) to tue
      for every edge (v,u)
        if (v,u) is false
          explore(v)

The result of this procedure is a tree of all the nodes. In the case of an
undirected graph, we never see cross edges on the tree branches.

Lemma: If w has a path from v, then explore(v) will visit w.
