# Growth Rates

    f = Symbol(g)

              | o
              | O
    Symbol = -| Θ
              | Ω
              | ω

If lim(n->∞) of f/g exists:

    lim = ∞ implies ω
    lim < ∞ && lim > 0 implies Θ
    lim = 0 implies o

Given those constraints, why do we even bother considering O or Ω?

 - When f/g is not nice
 - When can only upper or lower bound f/g

## Lower bounds

We can give lower bounds based on guaranteed factors. For example, a sorting
algorithm must visit all n inputs and therefore the lower bound must be n.

# Funny bullshit

Consider `e^(2πi/3)` which equals `[e^(2πi)]^(1/3)` by the exponent rule:

    e^(a*b) = (e^a)^b

We also know that `e^(2πi) = 1` and therefore:

    [e^(2πi)]^(1/3)
    = [1]^(1/3)
    = 1

But this is a contradiction! The reason this occurs is that the exponents rule
doesn't really apply to complex numbers.

# Topological Sort

__Definition:__ Find an ordering of the nodes such that every edge points
forward. (Ex. 1, 4, 5, 3, 2, 6)

We have the graph G = (V,E) which is supposed to be a prerequisite structure.

        6
        ↑
    5 → 3 → 2
    ↑   ↑
    1 → 4

The only way we can topologically sort a directed graph is if it has no
directed cycles. (Undirected cycles are ok).

## Algorithm

    Topological_Sort = (G) ->
      [pre, post] = DFS(G)
      List the nodes in decreasing order of post numbers

# Strongly Connected Components of Directed Graphs

A graph is strongly connected if from every node you can get to any other node
in the graph G.

## U ~ V

__Definition:__ if V is reachable from U, the U is reachable from V

~ is an equivalence relation:

 1. Reflexive  (V ~ V)
 2. Symmetric  (V ~ U → U ~ V)
 3. Transitive (U ~ V && V ~ W → U ~ W)

Since ~ is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive, we can classify nodes as
follows:

    U and V belong to the same class if U ~ V


