# Properties of Algebraic Operations

## Selection

 - Cascade: `σa^b^c^...^z (R) = σa( σb ( σc ( ...( σz (R)))))`
 - Commute: `σa (σb (R)) = σb (σa (R))`

## Projection

 - Cascade: `πA (R) = πA( πA (R) )`

## Joins

 - Associative: `R * ( S * T) = (R * S) * T`
 - Commute: `R * S = S * R`

# System R

## How does System R make decisions about queries?

System R only considers left deep plans, in the case of association, left deep
plans always have parenthesis on the left. System R also won't consider cross
products unless it has no other choice.

Having good statics about your data is essential because it helps System R
make educated decisions about what the outcome of a query will be.  Either way
it is still a guess.

Usually the database keeps things like:

 - height of index
 - integrity constraints
 - number of tuples
 - number of key/value pairs
 - high and low values

Summary of Decision Making Factors

 - Left deep plans
 - no cross product
 - cost estimation and reduction factor

## Determining Size of Output

    SELECT
    FROM R1, ..., RN
    WHERE condition1
      AND condition2
      ...
      AND conditionN

How big will the resulting output be? Depends on reduction factor!

_Conjunctive Normal Form_ - All conditions are connected by `AND` statements.

Q: If I have N independent conditions, how big will the output be?

A: The maximum would be N1 * N2 * ... * N and the minimum would be 0.

## Reduction Factors

If condition1 is 10% of the total records and condition2 is 5% of the total
records, what is the size of the output? Assume the conditions are
independent.

 - condition1 AND condition2: `0.10 * 0.05 = 0.005 (0.5%)`
 - condition1 OR condition2: `1 - ((1 - 0.10)(1 - 0.05)) = 0.145 (14.5%)`

To estimate size based on Projection, we do more or less the same thing as
selection.

### Calculating reduction factors

    col = val         1 / # of keys (# of of distinct values)
    col > val         (high - value) / (high - low)
    col1 = col2       max(# of keys1, # of keys2)

## Formulating  a Plan

 1. Start by calculating the best 1 relation plans for each relation

Keep any interesting ordering plans and the best generic plan and discard the
rest.

 2. Consider each nesting of the one relation plans to find the best two relation plan

Keep any interesting ordering plans and the best generic plan and discard the
rest.

...

 N. Consider each nesting of the (N-1) relation plans to find the best N relation plan

## Example 15.9 part 6

3 tables:

    Employee( __eid: integer__, salary: integer, age: real, did: integer )
    Department( __did: integer__, __pid: integer__, budget: real, status: char(10))
    Project( __pid: integer__, code: integer, report: varchar)

Table Size:

    B = 12, each page is 4,096 bytes

    Employee: 20 bytes/tuple, 20,000 tuples, 200 tuples/page => 100 pages
    Department: 40 bytes/tuple, 5,000 tuples, 100 tuples/page => 50 pages
    Project: 2000 bytes/tuple, 1,000 tuples, 2 tuples/page => 500 pages

Each department has 10 projects on average. Which means there are about 500
unique department ids.

Query:

    SELECT E.rid, D.did, P.pid
    FROM E, D, P
    WHERE E.sal = 50,000
      AND D.budget > 20,000
      AND E.did = D.did
      AND D.pid = P.pid

Salaries are uniformly distributed between 10,009 and 110,008
Budgets are uniformly distributed between 10,000 and 30,000

Indexes:

    Clustered Salary index on Employee
    Clustered did index on Department
    Clustered pid index on Project

What are the reduction factors?

 - Salary: `1 / (110,008 - 10,009) = 1 / 100,000`
 - Budget: `(30,000 - 20,000) / (30,000 - 10,000) = .5`

Cost:

__1 Relation Plans:__

Employee:

 - Sequential scan: `100 pages = 100 I/Os` (discard)
 - Index: `4 tree levels + 1 record (+ 1 output) = 5 I/Os`

Department:

 - Sequential Scna: 50 pages = 50 I/Os
 - Index: 1/8 * 40 bytes * 100 tuples ~= 7 pages + 50 I/Os = 57 I/Os

Project:

 - Sequential Scan: 500 pages

__ 2 Relation Plans:__

Employee, Department: 5 I/Os + 22 I/Os + (1 output)

Department, Employee: SMJ[ 50 outer + 1 inner] + (1 output) (discard)

Project, Department: 

 - INL[ 500 pages + 1000 tuples * 1.2 ] = 1,700
 - BNL[ 500 pages + ceil(500/10) * 50 ] = 3,000

Around 2,000 pages of output

Department, Project:

 - INL[ 50 + 5,000 * 1.2 ] (discard)

__3 Relation Plans:__

((E D) P): `7.2 + 1 * 1.2 (+ 1 output)`

((P D) E) (discard)

# Misc. Notes

Group by and Order by are usually executed last during query optimization

Cross product is also executed last when the data is the smallest.
