# Bulk Loading

In a B+ Tree, only the lead nodes conatin data.  All the parent nodes are just
for navigation.

In order to insert data, we may have to add extra leaf nodes to the tree,
which may cause use to add extra parent nodes for navigation.  This means that
B+ trees grow from the bottom up.

Instead of inserting one node at a time, it is more efficent to sort all the
nodes into the leaf nodes and then building the tree after that.

 1) Order the tree by the search key
 2) Build tree from the bottom up

# Transactions

A transaction is a set of reads and writes over the data that together forms
an interaction that the user has with the data.

## ACID

 - A = Atomicity
 - C = Consistency
 - I = Isolation
 - D = Durability

### Atomicity

__commit__: A transaction was successful and the user has been notified

__abort__: Something went wrong with the transaction (locked, errors, etc). If
a transaction aborts we must be able to rollback to maintain consistency.

Example Transaction:

    T1: BEGIN; A=A-100; B=B+100; END;
    T2: BEGIN; A=1.06A; B=1.06B; END;

    T1: BEGIN; R(A)W(A); R(B)W(B); END;
    T2: BEGIN; R(A)W(A); R(B)W(B); END;

To have atomicity, T1 and T2 should be performed completely or not at all.

    A = 1000
    B = 1000

T1 -> T2:

     A = 900   A=954
     B = 1100  B=1166

T2 -> T1

     A=1060  A=960
     B=1060  B=1160

These are acceptable because the same amount of money exists in the system
regardless of the order.  With interleaving we may not get that consistency.

__Equivalent Schedules__: For any database, the effects of S1 and S2 are the same.
__Serializable Schedule__: Equivalent to a serial schedule.

If two transactions touch completely differnt data, they can be interleaved
however we want.

#### Conflict Types

 - RR: Reads don't affect the data so order doesn't matter
 - WR: Reading dirty data that hasn't been commited (Conflict)
 - RW: Unrepeatable read (Conflict)
 - WW: Overwritting uncommited data (Conflict)

#### Dependency Graphs

Draw a line between each transaction as you run into a conflict.  If a graph
has a cycle, then the transaction is not serializable.

    T1: R(A)W(A)                   R(B)W(B)
    T2:          R(A)W(A) R(B)W(B)

#### Locking

The main problem with locking is that deadlocks can occur.  There are
strategies that can avoid or identify deadlocks.

There are four main types of schedules:

 - Serial Schedule: All transactions are perfomed serial
 - Strict Schedule: No written value is read until it is committed.
 - Avoid Cascading Values: Only reads changes of committed transactions
 - Recoverable: Transaction commits only after all transactions whose changes
   it read committed

Two types of locks: Shared and Exclusive.  Shared locks means other people can
read it, but not write to it. Exclusive locks means no reading or writing at
all.

#### Avoiding Deadlocks

The best way to avoid deadlocks is to assign transactions priority.

 - Wait/Die: If you have higher priority than the transaction with the lock,
   wait for the lock.
 - Abort/Die: If you have higher priority than the trasaction with the lock,
   abort it and take over.
