# Graphs

## Representing Graphs

Example Graph:

    A -> B -> C

### Adjacency Matrix

        A B C
    A | 0 1 0
    B | 1 0 1
    C | 0 1 0

 - Constant time querying
 - N^2 space complexity

### Adjacency List

    A: B
    B: A, C
    C: B

If the graph is undirected, each edge is represented twice.

 - O(|v|) space complexity
 - Worst case time complexity would be O(|E|)

## Sparse Graphs

If you have something with very little connectivity, the adjacency list is a
much more efficient way to store the data because you aren't storing the
redundent zeros in the matrix.

## Tree vs Graph

A tree is a subtype of graph.  Graphs can have cycles and don't have the rigid
level structure that trees do.

## Depth First Search

Why do we need the visited list? Because a cyclical graph would confuse the
algorithm!

Breadth First Search expands all neighbors level by level.

 - Time Complexity: `O(|V| + |E|)`
 - DFS produces a spanning tree

### Algorithm

    visited = []

    DFS = (G) ->
      visited = []
      for v in G.V
        visited[v] = false

      for v in G.V
        explore(v) unless visited[v]

    explore = (V) ->
       visited[V] = true
       previsit(V)
       for edge in V.edges
         explore(edge.v) unless visited[edge.v]
       postvisit(V)

During explore(v):

 1. Mark it as visited
 2. Loop over all adjacent edges and explore those

### Stack Algorithm

You can implement a non-recursive implementation of DFS by using a stack and
BFS using a queue.

### Pre and Post Numbers

For each node in the DFS tree, the parent nodes pre and post numbers are a
range that all its children's pre and post numbers fall within.
